Update openscap docs for 1.0 (#1491)
theforeman/theforeman.org: plugins/foreman_openscap/1.0/index.md

---
layout: plugin
title: Foreman OpenSCAP manual
images: /plugins/foreman_openscap/1.0
version: 1.0.0
version_short: '1.0'
foreman_version: '1.23'
foreman_ansible_version: '3.x'
# uncomment for older versions than stable or nightly

> robots: noindex

Reviewer: This should be commented here, i meant uncomment it on the older versions of the manual so google stops indexing them and indexes this version instead

    > yum install rubygem-smart_proxy_openscap

Edit ```/etc/foreman-proxy/settings.d/openscap.yml``` with the appropriate settings
```yaml
    ---
    :enabled: true

    # Log file for the forwarding script.
    :openscap_send_log_file: /var/log/foreman-proxy/openscap-send.log

    # Directory where OpenSCAP audits are stored
    # before they are forwarded to Foreman
    :spooldir: /var/spool/foreman-proxy/openscap

    # Directory where OpenSCAP content XML are stored
    # So we will not request the XML from Foreman each time
    :contentdir: /var/lib/openscap/content

    # Directory where OpenSCAP report XML are stored
    # So Foreman can request arf xml reports
    :reportsdir: /usr/share/foreman-proxy/openscap/reports

    # Directory where OpenSCAP report XML are stored
    # In case sending to Foreman succeeded, yet failed to save to reportsdir
    :failed_dir: /usr/share/foreman-proxy/openscap/failed

    # Directory where corrupted OpenSCAP report XML are stored
    # When proxy cannot parse the report sent by client
    :corrupted_dir: /var/lib/foreman-proxy/openscap/corrupted

    # Timeout for sending OpenSCAP reports to Foreman server, in seconds
    :timeout: 60

> ```

Reviewer: This should be unindented so it can be copy-pasted (yaml is very sensitive to spaces)

    # Client host certificate.
    # It could be Puppet agent host certificate (e.g., '/var/lib/puppet/ssl/certs/myhost.example.com.pem')
    # Or (recommended for client reporting to Katello) consumer certificate (e.g., '/etc/pki/consumer/cert.pem')
    :host_certificate: '/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/ssl/certs/ada-bivens.example.com.pem'
    # Client private key
    # It could be Puppet agent private key (e.g., '/var/lib/puppet/ssl/private_keys/myhost.example.com.pem')
    # Or (recommended for client reporting to Katello) consumer private key (e.g., '/etc/pki/consumer/key.pem')
    :host_private_key: '/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/ssl/private_keys/ada-bivens.example.com.pem'

    # policy (key is id as in Foreman)

    1:
      :profile: 'xccdf_org.ssgproject.content_profile_stig-java-upstream'
      :content_path: '/var/lib/openscap/content/fe93f99c14251cc76e92b9da71c351c8ba45fbd3639a2cd55911ef6f7db1b650.xml'
      # Download path
      # A path to download SCAP content from proxy
      :download_path: '/compliance/policies/1/content/fe93f99c14251cc76e92b9da71c351c8ba45fbd3639a2cd55911ef6f7db1b650'
      :tailoring_path: ''
      :tailoring_download_path: ''

> ```

Reviewer: unindent here as well

---
layout: plugin
title: Foreman OpenSCAP manual
images: /plugins/foreman_openscap/1.0
version: 1.0.0

> version_short: 1.0

Reviewer: This needs to be quoted so it's not interpreted as float

foreman_version: '1.21'

> # uncomment for older versions than stable or nightly

Reviewer: These need updating

> #robots: noindex

Reviewer: You should probably uncomment this for the older versions

__SCAP Content__ represents SCAP DataStream XML file as defined by SCAP 1.2 standard. DataStream file contains implementation of compliance,
configuration or security baselines. Users are advised to acquire examplary baseline by installing scap-security-guide package.
DataStream file usualy contains multiple XCCDF Profiles. Each for different security target. The content of DataStream file can be inspected by oscap tool from openscap-scanner package.
(XCCDF = Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format, XCCDF profile = A checklist which audit specific security target)

__Tailoring File__ is a XML file very much like SCAP Content. It represents a customization of compliance defined in a SCAP Content XML file. Additional details and instructions how to create such a file are available in the official openscap [documentation](https://www.open-scap.org/resources/documentation/customizing-scap-security-guide-for-your-use-case/).

__Compliance Policy__ is high level concept of a baseline applied to the infrastructure. Compliance policy is defined by user on web interface. Users may assign following information to the policy:

> * Deployment Options - how the client will be deployed. The options are Ansible (provided you have foreman_ansible plugin), Puppet or manual. It is recommended to use Puppet or Ansible for client deployment as they provide a convenient way of applying changes. See section [2.3](plugins/foreman_openscap/0.9/index.html#2.3Policydeploymentoptions) for details on policy deployment options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Deployment Options - how the client will be deployed. The options are Ansible (provided you have foreman_ansible plugin), Puppet or manual. It is recommended to use Puppet or Ansible for client deployment as they provide a convenient way of applying changes. See section [2.3](plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#2.3Policydeploymentoptions) for details on policy deployment options.
```

* SCAP Content
* XCCDF Profile from particular SCAP Content
* Tailoring File
* XCCDF Profile from a Tailoring File
* Hostgroups that should comply with the policy
* Schedule - the period in which the audit shall occur

__ARF Report__ is XML output of single scan occurrence per single host. Asset Reporting File format is defined by SCAP 1.2 standard. Foreman plug-in stores the ARF Reports in database for later inspections.

## 1.2 Release notes

Compatibility matrix

> <table class="table table-bordered table-condensed">

Reviewer: This probably needs to be updated as well, i don't think anyone cares about 0.3.4 being compatible with foreman 1.7 when they read the manual for 1.0 version of the plugin

  <tr>
    <th>Foreman version</th>
    <th>Plugin version</th>
    <th>Proxy version</th>
    <th>Client version</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>= 1.7</td>
    <td>0.3.4</td>
    <td>0.3.1</td>
    <td>0.1.1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>>= 1.8</td>
    <td>0.4.1</td>
    <td>0.4.0</td>
    <td>0.1.1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>>= 1.11</td>
    <td>0.5.0</td>
    <td>0.5.0</td>
    <td>0.1.2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>>= 1.13</td>
    <td>0.6.0</td>
    <td>0.6.0</td>
    <td>0.2.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>>= 1.15</td>
    <td>0.7.0</td>
    <td>0.6.0</td>
    <td>0.3.0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>>= 1.16</td>
    <td>0.8.0</td>
    <td>0.6.0</td>
    <td>0.3.0</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>>= 1.17</td>
    <td>0.9.0</td>
    <td>>=0.6.0</td>

>     <td>0.3.0</td>

Reviewer 2: I guess we could drop old version that are no longer supported, but that is unrelated and can be done separately in future

* Smart Proxy OpenSCAP (smart_proxy_openscap)
* puppet-foreman_scap_client or ansible-foreman_scap_client

## 2.1 Installing foreman_openscap

The easiest and recommended way is using foreman-installer. It's as easy as running this command

	> foreman-installer --enable-foreman-plugin-openscap

If you prefer the manual way, you can install it from package like this:

	> yum install tfm-rubygem-foreman_openscap
	> foreman-rake db:migrate
	> foreman-rake db:seed
	> service httpd reload

Please refer to the Foreman plugin [manual]({{site.baseurl}}/manuals/latest/index.html#6.1InstallaPlugin) for more information about installing Foreman plugins.

## 2.2 Installing smart_proxy_openscap

The easiest and recommended way is using foreman-installer. It's as easy as running this command

	> foreman-installer --enable-foreman-proxy-plugin-openscap

If you run Smart-Proxy with Foreman on the same host you can combine it with --enable-foreman-plugin-openscap option.

If you prefer the manual way, install this package on the Smart-Proxy server:

    > yum install rubygem-smart_proxy_openscap

Edit ```/etc/foreman-proxy/settings.d/openscap.yml``` with the appropriate settings

>     ---

Reviewer: I think you can use ```yaml to have syntax highlighting here

It is important to make sure *foreman_scap_client* package is available to your client system. Foreman plugins repo can be optionally enabled using the appropriate parameters/variables. The repo is disabled by default as users may prefer to use their own mirror.

### 2.3.1 Puppet

Recommended way is to install the packaged version from our repositories:

    yum -y install puppet-foreman_scap_client

Then [import]({{site.baseurl}}/manuals/latest/index.html#4.2.2Classes) the module into Foreman.

The Puppet module is available on Puppet Forge, please be aware that the latest version in Forge might not be compatible with your version of Foreman.

    puppet module install theforeman-foreman_scap_client

Detailed parameter description can be found in the module's [documentation](https://forge.puppet.com/theforeman/foreman_scap_client).

### 2.3.2 Ansible

> Please read [section](plugins/foreman_openscap/0.9/index.html#4.6.1Authenticatingclients) about client authentication if running Foreman without Katello. Recommended way is to install the packaged version from our repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please read [section](plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#4.6.1Authenticatingclients) about client authentication if running Foreman without Katello. Recommended way is to install the packaged version from our repositories:
```

    yum -y install ansible-foreman_scap_client

> Then [import](plugins/foreman_ansible/2.x/index.html#4.1.1ImportingRoles) the role into Foreman.

Reviewer: should this point to ansible 3.x?

Ansible role is available on Ansible Galaxy, please be aware that the latest version in Galaxy might not be compatible with your version of Foreman.

    ansible-galaxy -p /etc/ansible/roles install theforeman.foreman_scap_client

Detailed variable description can be found in the role's [documentation](https://galaxy.ansible.com/theforeman/foreman_scap_client).

### 2.3.3 Manual

> Manual policy deployment does not require to install anything, but leaves configuration to user. See section [4.6.2](plugins/foreman_openscap/0.9/index.html#4.6.2Manualpolicydeployments) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manual policy deployment does not require to install anything, but leaves configuration to user. See section [4.6.2](plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#4.6.2Manualpolicydeployments) for details.
```

> # 3. Upgrading from 0.4.x

Reviewer 2: I guess we could drop this chapter completely

As with any Foreman plugin, the recommended upgrade path is done via `yum upgrade`. This will ensure that all of the packages are with the right version, dependencies
and data migrations.

__Note: ARF reports are not automatically migrated and need a manual step__

> ## 3.1 Migrating ARF reports from 0.4.x

Reviewer: Is this section still relevant?

__Process:__ During the ARF reports migration, the old ARF reports are fetched from the Foreman database, sent to the Smart-Proxy for re-processing and saving and are sent back to the Foreman in their new
format - while keeping their original data.

Once the old ARF report has successfully migrated, it is deleted from the old table.

# 4. Usage

This chapter covers features that you can use in terms of Foreman and OpenSCAP
integration. Everything described below assumes you've sucessfully completed the installation steps described in previous sections.

*__Please note:__ smart_proxy_openscap is __required__ for the normal operation of foreman_openscap*

You would usually start with uploading SCAP contents, then create policies of those SCAP contents and assign the policy to hosts or hostgroups.

## 4.1 Creating SCAP content

### 4.1.1 Creating default SCAP content

When installing foreman_openscap from RPM, we also add default SCAP content provided by [scap-security-guide](https://fedorahosted.org/scap-security-guide/).

In previous versions, the default SCAP content was added via seed task.

In version >= 0.5.x, we are processing all of OpenSCAP content and reports in the Proxy.

> 

Reviewer: we are on version 1.x, so it doesn't matter what was used before, just what is needed now.

## 4.3 Assigning policy to host

You can assign a policy in two ways:

* By assigning a policy to hostgroup(s) when creating / editing a policy. All hosts which belong to that hostgroup will automatically be assigned to the policy.
* By assigning a policy to host(s) via hosts index: In the hosts index, choose the hosts you wish to assign a policy. Click on 'Select Action' and choose: "Assign Compliance Policy" and choose which policy to assign to the selected hosts.

![Assign Hosts]({{page.images}}/assign_hosts.png)

## 4.4 ARF Reports
You can access the generated reports via Hosts -> Compliance -> Reports
![ARF reports index]({{page.images}}/arf_index.png)

Report page gives information about individual rules that were checked during scan. Here you can download the actual report generated by OpenSCAP in HTML or as XML in bzip archive.
![View ARF report]({{page.images}}/view_arf_report.png)

Clicking on "View full report" at the top of the page will lead you to the actual security audit report generated by OpenSCAP, with detailed information on the host's security check and suggested remediation.
![ARF report]({{page.images}}/arf_report.png)

> ## 4.5 Tailoring files ( foreman_openscap >= 0.6.5 )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4.5 Tailoring files
```

Using a Tailoring File effectively allows you to modify a policy. You can assign a Tailoring File to a Policy when creating / updating a policy. Because Tailoring File may contain multiple profiles, you have to select your modified profile as well.

### 4.5.1 Creating a Tailoring file

You can create a new Tailoring file with [SCAP Workbench](https://www.open-scap.org/tools/scap-workbench/)

### 4.5.2 Uploading a Tailoring file

__Access Tailoring files__ - Hosts -> Compliance -> Tailoring files

__Create Tailoring__ - Upload your Tailoring file xml

### 4.5.3 Assigning a Tailoring file to a Policy

Go to Hosts -> Compliance -> Policies

Select a Policy to edit

Go to 'SCAP Content' tab

Select a Tailoring file from a dropdown and then a profile that comes with it
![Tailoring a Policy]({{page.images}}/policy_tailoring.png)

## 4.6 Setting up hosts for scans

There are 3 important things that your host needs to have so that it can be scanned properly:

* Policy - you can assign it directly or via hostgroup. See section [4.3]({{site.baseurl}}/plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#4.3Assigningpolicytohost) for details.

> * foreman_scap_client Puppet module or Ansible role - it will take care of configuring the host with foreman_scap_client. Note that while puppet runs are scheduled periodically, you need to apply Ansible roles to propagate changes as Ansible does not run automatically. foreman_scap_client is a ruby script that runs the openscap scanner with configured options. You can assign module/role to the host such as you would any other module. See the section for [Puppet Classes]({{site.baseurl}}/manuals/{{page.foreman_version}}/index.html#4.2.2Classes) or [Ansible roles]({{site.baseurl}}/plugins/foreman_ansible/2.x/index.html#4.1.1ImportingRoles) for details.

Reviewer: ansible version again - maybe use another page variable to make sure we link the correct version everywhere?

foreman_scap_client_host_private_key_path: /etc/foreman_scap_client/ssl/private_keys/${client-fqdn}.pem
```

Apply theforeman.foreman_scap_client role on your host, which will configure the cert paths for client and it will be able to authenticate.

#### 4.6.2.2 Using manual policy deployment option

If user decided to use manual option and your Foreman installation does not include Katello, then steps for generating and copying certificates from the previous section applies. It is necessary to add paths to certificates to /etc/foreman_scap_client/config.yaml.

If your installation includes Katello, you need the consumer certificates:

* /etc/rhsm/ca/katello-server-ca.pem
* /etc/pki/consumer/cert.pem
* /etc/pki/consumer/key.pem

### 4.6.2 Manual policy deployments

If a user chooses `Manual` as a policy deployment, Foreman will not care about client configuration and will leave it entirely up to user to configure clients. Multiple manual steps will be required to configure clients to send reports (which can be automated by using Ansible or Puppet).

1) Install foreman_scap_client package on the client.

> 2) Create client config in /etc/foreman_scap_client/config.yaml and populate it with appropriate values. See example config in section [6.3](plugins/foreman_openscap/0.9/index.html#6.3Configforclient). The most convenient way to get the attributes for policies is to add a host parameter with `<%= @host.policies_enc %>` value to your client and then get the JSON value it generates from ENC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Create client config in /etc/foreman_scap_client/config.yaml and populate it with appropriate values. See example config in section [6.3](plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#6.3Configforclient). The most convenient way to get the attributes for policies is to add a host parameter with `<%= @host.policies_enc %>` value to your client and then get the JSON value it generates from ENC.
```

> 3) Make sure client has access to certificates to authenticate (See [previous](plugins/foreman_openscap/0.9/index.html#4.6.1Authenticatingclients) section for details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3) Make sure client has access to certificates to authenticate (See [previous](plugins/foreman_openscap/{{page.version_short}}/index.html#4.6.1Authenticatingclients) section for details).
```

Please note that any changes made in Foreman do not propagate to your clients as it is handled by Puppet module/Ansible role. When you add/remove policies to your hosts or modify existing policies in any way, you need to update the config on client manually.

> ## 4.7 Running a scan from UI ( foreman_openscap >= 0.6.5 )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4.7 Running a scan from UI
```

> In version 0.6.5 and higher, you can initiate scans from UI. Simply go to hosts page and select "Run OpenSCAP scan" from the dropdown menu. This will initiate a scan for all policies that are assigned to the host. foreman_remote_execution plugin of version 1.3.0 or higher needs to be installed for this feature to be enabled.

Reviewer: This could probably be re-worded to get rid of the history part.

      :tailoring_path: ''
      :tailoring_download_path: ''

There will be an entry for each policy that is assigned to your host. The policy entry starts by number followed by colon. Policy attributes are indented by 2 spaces. This file is also managed by Puppet and any manual changes will be rewritten on next Puppet agent run.

## 6.3 Running scans manually

You can try running foreman_scap_client manually by executing

    foreman_scap_client $policy_id

from your command line, where `$policy_id` is a policy id from config file (1 in case of example config file above)

## 6.4 Information in logs

If running scan manually succeeds and there are no errors, try switching logging to DEBUG on proxy with openscap feature that your host uploads reports to and restart the proxy. Then use

    tail -f /var/log/foreman-proxy/proxy.log

and run foreman_scap_client manually again. Tailing the proxy logs will give you more insight into what is going on when report is uploaded by a client. Tailing ```/var/log/foreman/production.log``` on your Foreman server might be usefull as well.

> ## 6.5 Slow queries due to many message records in database ( foreman_openscap >= 0.7.2 )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6.5 Slow queries due to many message records in database
```

Fix [#19527](http://projects.theforeman.org/issues/19527) introduced a performance improvements to some of report-related queries and also added a rake task that performs a cleanup of database by removing duplicated report messages. You can execute it by running:

    foreman-rake foreman_openscap:clean_messages

Please note that the task has to go through all your reports and it may take a significant amount of time to fininsh. We recommend expiring the reports that are no longer needed before running the task. This task does not need to be run more than once as the patch prevents the duplicates from being created.

> ## 6.6 Cleaning up reports without OpenSCAP proxy ( foreman_openscap >= 0.8.4 )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6.6 Cleaning up reports without OpenSCAP proxy
```
